README.md, before:

# ccin2p3-patterndb

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/ccin2p3/puppet-patterndb.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/ccin2p3/puppet-patterndb)

####Table of Contents

1. [Overview](#overview)
2. [Module Description](#module-description)
3. [Setup](#setup)
    * [What patterndb affects](#what-patterndb-affects)
    * [Setup requirements](#setup-requirements)
4. [Usage](#usage)
5. [Reference](#reference)
6. [Limitations](#limitations)
7. [Development](#development)

##Overview

This module handles patterndb configuration files.

##Module Description

This module will manage the pattern dabase of `syslog-ng`.
It manages existing `pdb` files, or generates new ones using key-value pairs in puppet manifests. No need to edit `XML` files anymore \o/.
Of course, you may also use a combination of both.
Either way, knowledge of `patterndb` is required as the manifests closely match the `XML` structure of patterndb files.
The [syslog-ng documentation](http://www.balabit.com/sites/default/files/documents/syslog-ng-ose-3.5-guides/en/syslog-ng-ose-v3.5-guide-admin/html-single/index.html#chapter-patterndb) is an excellent source for help on the subject.

##Setup

###What patterndb affects

Depending on the top-level configuration variable `$base_dir`, this module will manage and execute the following elements in order:

0. Manage package `syslog-ng` if not already handled elsewhere (`stdlib/ensure_resource`)
1. Manage `$base_dir/etc/syslog-ng/patterndb.d`
2. Manage the contents of the above directory using [existing](#defined-type-patterndbrawruleset) or [generated](#defined-type-patterndbsimpleruleset) patterndb ruleset files
3. Merge the contents of the latter using `pdbtool` into a temporary file `$temp_dir/syslog-ng/patterndb.xml`
4. (OPTIONAL) Test the resulting patterndb
5. Deploy the temporary file into `$base_dir/var/lib/syslog-ng/patterndb.xml`

Reloading of the syslog-ng daemon is not being taken care of, as the daemon already does that (very well).

###Setup Requirements

This module requires `stdlib` and supports `RedHat` and `Debian` osfamilies.

##Usage

Using defaults

    class { "patterndb": }

Overriding paths

    class { "patterndb":
      $base_dir => "/path/to/syslog-ng/prefix",
      $temp_dir => "/path/to/temp"
    }

##Reference

### Class: patterndb

Manages `Package['syslog-ng']` if `$manage_package` is set to `true`.
Manages `File["$temp_dir"]` as a directory.
Manages `File` resource `"$base_dir/etc/syslog-ng/patterndb.d"` recursively, and purges unknown files.
Manages `File["${base_dir}/var/lib/syslog-ng/patterndb.xml"]` or alternate path if overridden using `$pdb_path`.

#### Optional Parameters

* `$base_dir` Top level directory for resources
* `$temp_dir` Temporary directory for various components
* `$package_name` Name of the `syslog-ng` package. Defaults to the OS standard
* `$manage_package` Boolean to disable the management of the package. Defaults to `true`

###Class: patterndb::update

Handles merging and deploying of [provided](#defined-type-patterndbrawruleset) and/or [generated](#defined-type-patterndbsimpleruleset) `pdb` files.

####Optional Parameters

* syslogng_modules An array of modules to load when running `Exec['pdbtool ...']`

Controls the validation process of the merged patterndb file, *e.g.* `syslogng_modules => [ "tfgeoip" ]` will yield the `Exec` resource `pdbtool test [...] --module tfgeoip`.
This is necessary in case you are using non autoloading modules in patterndb, otherwise your validation will fail and your patterndb will fail to deploy itself.

* test_before_deploy Boolean

Controls wether merged pdb file is validated before being deployed. By default this is set to `true`.
Here's what happens under the hood (code is pretty self-explanatory):

		if $test_before_deploy {
			File['merged_and_deployed_pdb'] ~> Exec['patterndb::merge'] ~> Exec['patterndb::test'] ~> Exec['patterndb::deploy']
		} else {
			File['merged_and_deployed_pdb'] ~> Exec['patterndb::merge'] ~>                                Exec['patterndb::deploy']
		}

There is intentionally no way to test `pdb` files individually, as this only makes sense after the merge.

#### Example

		class { patterndb::update:
			syslogng_modules => [ "tfgeoip", "tfgetent" ],
			test_before_deploy => true
		}

### Defined Type: patterndb::raw::ruleset

Describes existing `pdb` resultsets. Handles the resource deployment of type `File`.

####Parameters

All parameters are passed along to the `File` resource, which will manage the `pdb` file, some of which will only affect operation if working on a directory.

####Mandatory Parameters

* `$source` No default value

####Optional Parameters

* `$ensure` Defaults to `'present'`. Use `'directory'` if we are to handle a bunch of pdb files.
* `$recurse` Defaults to `true`
* `$purge` Defaults to `true`
* `$sourceselect` Defaults to `'all'`
* `$ignore` Defaults to `[ '.svn', '.git' ]`

###Examples

####Single file
    
		patterndb::raw::ruleset { 'raw':
			source => 'puppet:///path/to/my/export/for/myraw.pdb'
		}

####Directory

		patterndb::raw::ruleset { 'raws':
			source => 'puppet:///path/to/my/exports/for/pdb',
			ensure => 'directory',
			purge  => true,
		}

### Defined Type: patterndb::simple::ruleset

Describes a full ruleset, *e.g.* a set of rules matching the same `PROGRAM` macro in syslog-ng. Handles the generation of `pdb` files from scratch.

####Mandatory Parameters

* `$id` A unique identifier for the ruleset. The use of [uuid](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universally_unique_identifier) is strongly recommended
* `$patterns` An array of strings representing the pattern matching the name of the `PROGRAM` macro in syslog messages, *e.g.* `['sshd', 'login', 'lftpd']`
* `$pubdate` The date the ruleset has been written in the format `YYYY-mm-dd`
* `$rules` An array of hashes describing the [rules](#defined-type-patterndbsimplerule)

####Optional Parameters

* `$version` patterndb ruleset version. Defaults to `4`
* (CURRENTLY IGNORED) `$description` a short description for the ruleset. Defaults to `"generated by puppet"`
* (CURRENTLY IGNORED) `$url` an url pointing to some information on the ruleset. Defaults to `undef`

###Examples

####Minimal

    patterndb::simple::ruleset { 'myruleset':
			id => '9586b525-826e-4c2d-b74f-381039cf470c',
			patterns => [ 'sshd' ],
			pubdate => '2014-03-24',
			rules => [
				{
					id => 'd69bd1ed-17ff-4667-8ea4-087170cbceeb',
					patterns => ['Successful login for user @QSTRING:user:"@ using method @QSTRING:method:"@']
				}
			]
    }

####Full

		patterndb::simple::ruleset { 'pam_unix':
			id => 'd254ec8b-be96-49cb-9424-16fcb1164157',
			patterns => [ 'sshd', 'crond', 'imap', 'login', 'pam', 'su', 'sudo' ],
			pubdate => '1985-10-26',
			version => '4',
			description => 'This ruleset contains patterns for pam_unix log messages',
			url => 'http://www.openpam.org/',
			rules => [
				{
					id => 'b85dfb49-b5e5-4bca-b2ca-5dd28ab13d5e',
					patterns => [
						'pam_unix(@ESTRING:usracct.application::@@ESTRING:usracct.service:)@: session closed for user @ANYSTRING:usracct.username:@'
						'pam_unix(@ESTRING:usracct.application::@@ESTRING:usracct.service:)@: session closed'
					],
					tags => [ 'usracct', 'secevt' ],
					values => {
						'usracct.type' => 'logout',
					},
					examples => [
						{
							program => 'sshd',
							test_message => 'pam_unix(sshd:session): session closed for user mmcfly',
							test_values => {
								'usracct.application' => 'sshd',
								'usracct.service' => 'session',
								'usracct.username' => 'mmcfly',
							}
						}
					],
				},
			],
		}

### Defined Type: patterndb::simple::rule

Describes a rule in a [ruleset](#defined-type-patterndbsimpleruleset).
Currently used for validation only.

####Mandatory Parameters

* `$id` A unique identifier for the rule. The use of [uuid](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universally_unique_identifier) is strongly recommended
* `$patterns` An array of patterns describing a log message *e.g.* `['Failed @ESTRING:usracct.authmethod: @for invalid user @ESTRING:usracct.username: @from @ESTRING:usracct.device: @port @ESTRING:: @@ANYSTRING:usracct.service@']`
* `$examples` An array of hashes containing [sample log messages](#defined-type-patterndbsimpleexample) which should match `$patterns`

####Optional Parameters

* `$provider` The provider of the rule. This is used to distinguish between who supplied the rule. Defaults to `'puppet'`
* `$ruleclass` The class of the rule — syslog-ng assigns this class to the messages matching a pattern of this rule. Defaults to `'system'`
* `$values` A hash of key-value pairs that are assigned to messages matching the rule. Defaults to `{}`
* `$tags` A list of keywords or tags applied to messages matching the rule. Defaults to `[]`
* `$context_scope` Specifies which messages belong to the same context. See the paragraph [13.5.3](http://www.balabit.com/sites/default/files/documents/syslog-ng-ose-3.5-guides/en/syslog-ng-ose-v3.5-guide-admin/html/reference-patterndb-schemes.html) of the syslog-ng onlmine manual for this and the 2 other context options. Valid values are: `process`, `program`, `host`, and `global`
* `$context_id` An identifier to group related log messages when using the pattern database to correlate events
* `$context_timeout` The number of seconds the context is stored
* `$actions` An array of [actions](#defined-type-patterndbsimpleaction) to perform when matching this rule

###Defined Type: patterndb::simple::example

Defined type describing sample messages in a [rule](#defined-type-patterndbsimplerule).
Currently used for validation only.
 
####Mandatory Parameters

* `$program` The `PROGRAM` pattern of the test message, *e.g.* `'sshd'`
* `$test_message` A sample log message that should match the [rule](#defined-type-patterndbsimplerule) *e.g.* `Failed password for invalid user deep_thought from 0.0.0.0 port -1 ssh42`

####Optional Parameters

* `$test_values` A hash of name-value pairs to test the results of the parsers used in the pattern, *e.g.* `{'usracct.username' => 'deep_thought'}`

###Defined Type: patterndb::simple::action

Defined type describing an action in a [rule](#defined-type-patterndbsimplerule).
Currently used for validation only.

See the paragraph [13.5.3](http://www.balabit.com/sites/default/files/documents/syslog-ng-ose-3.5-guides/en/syslog-ng-ose-v3.5-guide-admin/html/reference-patterndb-schemes.html) of the syslog-ng onlmine manual for more details on the parameters:

####Optional Parameters

* `$trigger` Specifies when the action is executed. The trigger attribute has the following possible values: `match` or `timeout`. 
* `$rate` Specifies maximum how many messages should be generated in the specified time period in the following format: messages/second, *e.g.* `1/60`
* `$condition` The action is performed only if the message matches the filter
* `$message` A hash describing the [message](#defined-type-patterndbsimpleactionmessage) to be sent when the action is executed

###Defined Type: patterndb::simple::action::message

Defined type describing action message in an [action](#defined-type-patterndbsimpleaction).
Currently used for validation only.

####Optional Parameters

* `$values` A hash containing a list of key-values describing the message, *e.g.* `{'MESSAGE' => 'generated by syslog-ng', 'PROGRAM' => 'syslog-ng'}`
* `$tags` A list of tags for the generated message
* `$inherit_properties` A boolean to toggle whether the generated message should inherit a copy of all values and tags from the triggering message. Defaults to `true`

##Limitations

* Needs more rspec tests
* No system tests yet
* nested defined types model has maybe better solutions
 
##Development
 
### Testing

* Smoke tests: run `./smoke/test` from the root directory
* For `puppet-rspec` tests use `bundle install && bundle exec rake spec`

### Contributing

Send issues or PRs to http://github.com/ccin2p3/puppet-patterndb

Commit message:

Add support for managing multiple merged pdbs

README.md, after:

# ccin2p3-patterndb

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/ccin2p3/puppet-patterndb.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/ccin2p3/puppet-patterndb)

####Table of Contents

1. [Overview](#overview)
2. [Module Description](#module-description)
3. [Setup](#setup)
    * [What patterndb affects](#what-patterndb-affects)
    * [Setup requirements](#setup-requirements)
4. [Usage](#usage)
5. [Reference](#reference)
6. [Limitations](#limitations)
7. [Development](#development)

##Overview

This module handles patterndb configuration files.

##Module Description

This module will manage the pattern databases of `syslog-ng`.
It manages existing `pdb` files, or generates new ones using key-value pairs in puppet manifests. No need to edit `XML` files anymore \o/.
Of course, you may also use a combination of both.
Either way, knowledge of `patterndb` is required as the manifests closely match the `XML` structure of patterndb files.
The [syslog-ng documentation](http://www.balabit.com/sites/default/files/documents/syslog-ng-ose-3.5-guides/en/syslog-ng-ose-v3.5-guide-admin/html-single/index.html#chapter-patterndb) is an excellent source for help on the subject.

##Setup

###What patterndb affects

Depending on the top-level configuration variable `$base_dir`, this module will manage and execute the following elements in order:

0. Manage package `syslog-ng` if not already handled elsewhere (`stdlib/ensure_resource`)
1. Manage `$base_dir/etc/syslog-ng/patterndb.d` recursively
2. Manage the contents of the above directory using [existing](#defined-type-patterndbrawruleset) or [generated](#defined-type-patterndbsimpleruleset) patterndb ruleset files
3. Merge the contents of the latter using `pdbtool` into a temporary file `$temp_dir/syslog-ng/${pdb_name}patterndb.xml` where `$pdb_name` is the name of the patterndb (you can have as many as you want, *e.g.* for *staged parsing*.
4. (OPTIONAL) Test the resulting patterndbs
5. Deploy the temporary files into `$base_dir/var/lib/syslog-ng/patterndb/${pdb_name}.xml`

Reloading of the syslog-ng daemon is not being taken care of, as the daemon already does that (very well).

###Setup Requirements

This module requires `stdlib` and supports `RedHat` and `Debian` osfamilies.

##Usage

Using defaults

    class { "patterndb": }

Overriding paths

    class { "patterndb":
      $base_dir => "/path/to/syslog-ng/prefix",
      $temp_dir => "/path/to/temp"
    }

##Reference

### Class: patterndb

Manages `Package['syslog-ng']` if `$manage_package` is set to `true`.
Manages `File["$temp_dir"]` as a directory.
Manages `File` resource `"$base_dir/etc/syslog-ng/patterndb.d"` recursively, and purges unknown files.
Manages `File["${base_dir}/var/lib/syslog-ng/patterndb.xml"]` or alternate path if overridden using `$pdb_path`.

#### Optional Parameters

* `$base_dir` Top level directory for resources
* `$temp_dir` Temporary directory for various components
* `$package_name` Name of the `syslog-ng` package. Defaults to the OS standard
* `$manage_package` Boolean to disable the management of the package. Defaults to `true`
* `$syslogng_modules` An array of `syslog-ng` modules. This can be used for other defines *e.g.* (update)(#defined-type-patterndbupdate). Defaults to `[]`
* `$test_before_deploy` A boolean which controls wether to test the pdbs before deploying (see (update)(#defined-type-patterndbupdate)). Defaults to `true`

###Defined Type: patterndb::update

Handles merging and deploying of [provided](#defined-type-patterndbrawruleset) and/or [generated](#defined-type-patterndbsimpleruleset) `pdb` files.

####Optional Parameters

* `$syslogng_modules` An array of modules to load when running `Exec['pdbtool ...']`

Controls the validation process of the merged patterndb file, *e.g.* `syslogng_modules => [ "tfgeoip" ]` will yield the `Exec` resource `pdbtool test [...] --module tfgeoip`.
This is necessary in case you are using non autoloading modules in patterndb, otherwise your validation will fail and your patterndb will fail to deploy itself. Defaults to the class value.

* `$test_before_deploy Boolean`

Controls wether merged pdb file is validated before being deployed. By default this is set to `true`.
Here's what happens under the hood (code is pretty self-explanatory):

		if $test_before_deploy {
			File['merged_and_deployed_pdb'] ~> Exec['patterndb::merge'] ~> Exec['patterndb::test'] ~> Exec['patterndb::deploy']
		} else {
			File['merged_and_deployed_pdb'] ~> Exec['patterndb::merge'] ~>                                Exec['patterndb::deploy']
		}

There is intentionally no way to test `pdb` files individually, as this only makes sense after the merge. This defaults to the class value.

#### Example

		patterndb::update { 'default':
			syslogng_modules => [ "tfgeoip", "tfgetent" ],
			test_before_deploy => true
		}

### Defined Type: patterndb::raw::ruleset

Describes existing `pdb` resultsets. Handles the resource deployment of type `File`.

####Parameters

All parameters are passed along to the `File` resource, which will manage the `pdb` file, some of which will only affect operation if working on a directory.

####Mandatory Parameters

* `$source` No default value

####Optional Parameters

* `$ensure` Defaults to `'present'`. Use `'directory'` if we are to handle a bunch of pdb files.
* `$recurse` Defaults to `true`
* `$purge` Defaults to `true`
* `$sourceselect` Defaults to `'all'`
* `$ignore` Defaults to `[ '.svn', '.git' ]`

###Examples

####Single file
    
		patterndb::raw::ruleset { 'raw':
			source => 'puppet:///path/to/my/export/for/myraw.pdb'
		}

####Directory

		patterndb::raw::ruleset { 'raws':
			source => 'puppet:///path/to/my/exports/for/pdb',
			ensure => 'directory',
			purge  => true,
		}

### Defined Type: patterndb::simple::ruleset

Describes a full ruleset, *e.g.* a set of rules matching the same `PROGRAM` macro in syslog-ng. Handles the generation of `pdb` files from scratch.

####Mandatory Parameters

* `$id` A unique identifier for the ruleset. The use of [uuid](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universally_unique_identifier) is strongly recommended
* `$patterns` An array of strings representing the pattern matching the name of the `PROGRAM` macro in syslog messages, *e.g.* `['sshd', 'login', 'lftpd']`
* `$pubdate` The date the ruleset has been written in the format `YYYY-mm-dd`
* `$rules` An array of hashes describing the [rules](#defined-type-patterndbsimplerule)

####Optional Parameters

* `$version` patterndb ruleset version. Defaults to `4`
* (CURRENTLY IGNORED) `$description` a short description for the ruleset. Defaults to `"generated by puppet"`
* (CURRENTLY IGNORED) `$url` an url pointing to some information on the ruleset. Defaults to `undef`

###Examples

####Minimal

    patterndb::simple::ruleset { 'myruleset':
			id => '9586b525-826e-4c2d-b74f-381039cf470c',
			patterns => [ 'sshd' ],
			pubdate => '2014-03-24',
			rules => [
				{
					id => 'd69bd1ed-17ff-4667-8ea4-087170cbceeb',
					patterns => ['Successful login for user @QSTRING:user:"@ using method @QSTRING:method:"@']
				}
			]
    }

####Full

		patterndb::simple::ruleset { 'pam_unix':
			id => 'd254ec8b-be96-49cb-9424-16fcb1164157',
			patterns => [ 'sshd', 'crond', 'imap', 'login', 'pam', 'su', 'sudo' ],
			pubdate => '1985-10-26',
			version => '4',
			description => 'This ruleset contains patterns for pam_unix log messages',
			url => 'http://www.openpam.org/',
			rules => [
				{
					id => 'b85dfb49-b5e5-4bca-b2ca-5dd28ab13d5e',
					patterns => [
						'pam_unix(@ESTRING:usracct.application::@@ESTRING:usracct.service:)@: session closed for user @ANYSTRING:usracct.username:@'
						'pam_unix(@ESTRING:usracct.application::@@ESTRING:usracct.service:)@: session closed'
					],
					tags => [ 'usracct', 'secevt' ],
					values => {
						'usracct.type' => 'logout',
					},
					examples => [
						{
							program => 'sshd',
							test_message => 'pam_unix(sshd:session): session closed for user mmcfly',
							test_values => {
								'usracct.application' => 'sshd',
								'usracct.service' => 'session',
								'usracct.username' => 'mmcfly',
							}
						}
					],
				},
			],
		}

### Defined Type: patterndb::simple::rule

Describes a rule in a [ruleset](#defined-type-patterndbsimpleruleset).
Currently used for validation only.

####Mandatory Parameters

* `$id` A unique identifier for the rule. The use of [uuid](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universally_unique_identifier) is strongly recommended
* `$patterns` An array of patterns describing a log message *e.g.* `['Failed @ESTRING:usracct.authmethod: @for invalid user @ESTRING:usracct.username: @from @ESTRING:usracct.device: @port @ESTRING:: @@ANYSTRING:usracct.service@']`
* `$examples` An array of hashes containing [sample log messages](#defined-type-patterndbsimpleexample) which should match `$patterns`

####Optional Parameters

* `$provider` The provider of the rule. This is used to distinguish between who supplied the rule. Defaults to `'puppet'`
* `$ruleclass` The class of the rule — syslog-ng assigns this class to the messages matching a pattern of this rule. Defaults to `'system'`
* `$values` A hash of key-value pairs that are assigned to messages matching the rule. Defaults to `{}`
* `$tags` A list of keywords or tags applied to messages matching the rule. Defaults to `[]`
* `$context_scope` Specifies which messages belong to the same context. See the paragraph [13.5.3](http://www.balabit.com/sites/default/files/documents/syslog-ng-ose-3.5-guides/en/syslog-ng-ose-v3.5-guide-admin/html/reference-patterndb-schemes.html) of the syslog-ng onlmine manual for this and the 2 other context options. Valid values are: `process`, `program`, `host`, and `global`
* `$context_id` An identifier to group related log messages when using the pattern database to correlate events
* `$context_timeout` The number of seconds the context is stored
* `$actions` An array of [actions](#defined-type-patterndbsimpleaction) to perform when matching this rule

###Defined Type: patterndb::simple::example

Defined type describing sample messages in a [rule](#defined-type-patterndbsimplerule).
Currently used for validation only.
 
####Mandatory Parameters

* `$program` The `PROGRAM` pattern of the test message, *e.g.* `'sshd'`
* `$test_message` A sample log message that should match the [rule](#defined-type-patterndbsimplerule) *e.g.* `Failed password for invalid user deep_thought from 0.0.0.0 port -1 ssh42`

####Optional Parameters

* `$test_values` A hash of name-value pairs to test the results of the parsers used in the pattern, *e.g.* `{'usracct.username' => 'deep_thought'}`

###Defined Type: patterndb::simple::action

Defined type describing an action in a [rule](#defined-type-patterndbsimplerule).
Currently used for validation only.

See the paragraph [13.5.3](http://www.balabit.com/sites/default/files/documents/syslog-ng-ose-3.5-guides/en/syslog-ng-ose-v3.5-guide-admin/html/reference-patterndb-schemes.html) of the syslog-ng onlmine manual for more details on the parameters:

####Optional Parameters

* `$trigger` Specifies when the action is executed. The trigger attribute has the following possible values: `match` or `timeout`. 
* `$rate` Specifies maximum how many messages should be generated in the specified time period in the following format: messages/second, *e.g.* `1/60`
* `$condition` The action is performed only if the message matches the filter
* `$message` A hash describing the [message](#defined-type-patterndbsimpleactionmessage) to be sent when the action is executed

###Defined Type: patterndb::simple::action::message

Defined type describing action message in an [action](#defined-type-patterndbsimpleaction).
Currently used for validation only.

####Optional Parameters

* `$values` A hash containing a list of key-values describing the message, *e.g.* `{'MESSAGE' => 'generated by syslog-ng', 'PROGRAM' => 'syslog-ng'}`
* `$tags` A list of tags for the generated message
* `$inherit_properties` A boolean to toggle whether the generated message should inherit a copy of all values and tags from the triggering message. Defaults to `true`

##Limitations

* Needs more rspec tests
* No system tests yet
* nested defined types model has maybe better solutions
 
##Development
 
### Testing

* Smoke tests: run `./smoke/test` from the root directory
* For `puppet-rspec` tests use `bundle install && bundle exec rake spec`

### Contributing

Send issues or PRs to http://github.com/ccin2p3/puppet-patterndb
